Native Reference Guide (#22614)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/native-reference.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Native Reference Guide

This guide is a companion to the
xref:building-native-image.adoc[Building a Native Executable],
xref:native-and-ssl.adoc[Using SSL With Native Images],
and xref:writing-native-applications-tips.adoc[Writing Native Applications],
guides.
It provides further details to debugging issues in Quarkus native executables that might arise during development or production.

This reference guide takes as input the application developed in the link:getting-started[Getting Started Guide].

== Requirements and Assumptions

> Debugging Quarkus native executables experience is best done within a Linux environment with root access.

Author: Yeah we can clarify this further. IIRC this is only needed to get all the events necessary for profiling with `perf`. IOW, where needed we added the corresponding `sudo` commands.

Debugging in MacOS and Windows environments also works in a container environment (see <<macwindows,FAQ entry>>).

These are the packages you'll need on your Linux environment to run through the different debugging sections:

[source,bash]
----
# dnf (rpm-based)
sudo dnf install binutils gdb perf perl-open
# Debian-based distributions:

> sudo apt-get install binutils gdb perf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sudo apt install binutils gdb perf
```

----

Aside from system level packages, you'll need:

* JDK 11 installed with `JAVA_HOME` configured appropriately

> * Apache Maven 3.8.1+

Reviewer 2: A bit off topic but, a `{java-major-version}` should be introduced as well I guess.

> * Apache Maven 3.8.1+

Author: @zakkak Just added https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/22933

* A working container runtime (Docker, podman)
* The code of the application developed in the link:getting-started[Getting Started Guide].

> Finally, this guide assumes Mandrel distribution of GraalVM for building native executables,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this guide assumes the use of the Mandrel distribution of GraalVM for building native executables,
```

   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libnet.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libextnet.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libnio.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libjava.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libfdlibm.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libsunec.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/static/linux-amd64/glibc/libzip.a
   ../opt/mandrel/lib/svm/clibraries/linux-amd64/libjvm.a
Other libraries: stdc++,pthread,dl,z,rt
----

Even more detail can be obtained by passing in `--verbose` as an additional native-image build argument.
This option can be very useful in detecting whether the options that you pass at a high level via Quarkus are being passed down to the native executable production,
or whether some third party jar has some native-image configuration embedded in it that is reaching the native-image invocation:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true \
    -Dquarkus.native.builder-image=quay.io/quarkus/ubi-quarkus-mandrel:{mandrel-flavor} \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--verbose
----

> Running with `--verbose` demonstrates how the native-image building process is 2 sequential java processes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running with `--verbose` demonstrates how the native-image building process is two sequential java processes:
```

> * The first is a very short java process that does some basic validation and builds the arguments for the second process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first is a very short Java process that does some basic validation and builds the arguments for the second process
```

(in a stock GraalVM distribution, this is executed as native code).

> * The second Java process is where the meat of the native executable production happens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The second Java process is where the main part of the native executable production happens.
```

The `--verbose` option shows the actual Java process executed.
You could take the output and run it yourself.

> One may also combine multiple native-image build options by separating with a comma, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One may also combine multiple `native-image` build options by separating with a comma, e.g.:
```

Author: Actually, I'd probably not reference `native-image` at all since it's not really used in the reference guide. I'll just remove `-image`.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true \
    -Dquarkus.native.builder-image=quay.io/quarkus/ubi-quarkus-mandrel:{mandrel-flavor} \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--native-image-info,--verbose
----

[TIP]
====
Remember that if an argument for `-Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args` includes the `,` symbol,
it needs to be escaped to be processed correcly, e.g. `\\,`.
====

> Given a native executable, we can use several linux tools to gather information.

Reviewer: Should this be in a separate subsection?

Author: At a first glance I don't think so. This first section focuses on basic things we can do to gather information about the native binary build process and the native binary itself. Hence it's call first debugging steps.

> Given a native executable, we can use several linux tools to gather information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given a native executable, various Linux tools can be used to inspect it.
```

`ldd` shows the shared library dependencies of an executable:

[source,bash]
----
ldd ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
----

`strings` can be used to look for text messages inside the binary:

[source,bash]
----
strings ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner | grep Hello
----

Using `strings` you can also get Mandrel information given the binary:

[source,bash]
----
strings ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner | grep core.VM
----

Finally, using `readelf` we can inspect different sections of the binary.
For example, we can see how the heap and text sections take most of binary:

[source,bash]
----
readelf -SW ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
----

== Native Reports

> Optionally, we can instruct native-image process to generate reports to understand what goes into the binary:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optionally, we can instruct `native-image` to generate reports to understand what goes into the binary:
```

Author: Same as https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/22614#discussion_r785677501

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true \
    -Dquarkus.native.builder-image=quay.io/quarkus/ubi-quarkus-mandrel:{mandrel-flavor} \
    -Dquarkus.native.enable-reports
----

The reports will be created under `target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-native-image-source-jar/reports/`.
These reports are some of the most useful resources when encountering issues with missing methods/classes, or encountering forbidden methods by Mandrel.

=== Call Tree Reports

`call_tree` text file report is one of the default reports generated when the `-Dquarkus.native.enable-reports` option is passed in.
This is useful for getting an approximation on why a method/class is included in the binary.
However, the text format makes it very difficult to read and can take up a lot of space.

> Since Mandrel 21.3.0, the call tree is also reported as a group of CSV files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since Mandrel 21.3.0.0-Final, the call tree is also reported as a group of CSV files.
```

These can in turn be imported into a graph database, such as Neo4j,
to inspect them more easily and run queries against the call tree.
Let’s see this in action.

First, start a Neo4j instance:

[source,bash]
----
export NEO_PASS=...
podman run \
  --detach \
  --rm \
  --name testneo4j \
  -p7474:7474 -p7687:7687 \
  --env NEO4J_AUTH=neo4j/${NEO_PASS} \
  neo4j:latest
----

Once the container is running,

> you can access the Neo4j browser via http://localhost:7474.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can access the Neo4j browser via `http://localhost:7474`.
```

For example, methods that directly call a method can be located via:

[source,cypher]
----
match (m:Method) <- [*1..1] - (o) where m.name = "hello" return *
----

Then you can look for direct calls at depth of 2,
so you’d search for methods that call methods that call into the target method:

[source,cypher]
----
match (m:Method) <- [*1..2] - (o) where m.name = "hello" return *
----

You can continue going up layers,
but unfortunately if you reach a depth with too many nodes,
the Neo4j browser will be unable to visualize them all.
When that happens, you can alternatively run the queries directly against the cypher shell:

[source,bash]
----
podman exec testneo4j bin/cypher-shell -u neo4j -p ${NEO_PASS} \
  "match (m:Method) <- [*1..10] - (o) where m.name = 'hello' return *"
----

=== Used Packages/Classes/Methods Reports

`used_packages`, `used_classes` and `used_methods` text file reports come in handy when comparing different versions of the application,
e.g. why does the image take longer to build? Or why is the image bigger now?

=== Further Reports

Mandrel can produce further reports beyond the ones that are enabled with the `-Dquarkus.native.enable-reports` option.

> These are called expert options and you can learn more about them typing:

Reviewer: Maybe have a small section describing what information these expert reports provide?

Author: Well, typing the above gives you information about those, e.g. [sample output](https://gist.github.com/galderz/8fbab86d55210206994eaeeabf03343c). I didn't want to more information on those because they could change in next GraalVM version, or they could disappear. We don't normally use them unless we're looking for something very specific.

> These are called expert options and you can learn more about them typing:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are called expert options and you can learn more about them by running:
```

[source,bash]
----
echo -1 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
----

Then, we execute:

[source,bash]
----
perf record -F 1009 -g -a ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
----

While `perf record` is running, open another window and access the endpoint:

[source,bash]
----
curl http://localhost:8080/hello # this will never complete
----

After a few seconds, halt the `perf record` process.
This will generate a `perf.data` file.
We could use `perf report` to inspect the perf data,
but you can often get a better picture showing that data as a flame graph.
To generate flame graphs, checkout the
https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph[FlameGraph GitHub repository]
locally and export its location via the `FG_HOME` environment variable, e.g.

[source,bash]
----
export FG_HOME=/tmp/FlameGraph
git clone https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph ${FG_HOME}
----

Then, generate a flame graph using the data captured via `perf record`:

[source,bash]
----
$ perf script -i perf.data | ${FG_HOME}/stackcollapse-perf.pl > out.perf-folded
$ ${FG_HOME}/flamegraph.pl out.perf-folded > flamegraph.svg
----

> The flame graph is an svg file that a web browser, such as Firefox, can easily display.

Reviewer 2: > Isn't it an HTML file by default now?

No, `flamegraph.pl` produces svg files, see https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph#3-flamegraphpl

> At least that's the case with async profiler, maybe it's not the case for this tool?

:point_up:

== Debugging Native Crashes

One of the drawbacks of using native executables is that they cannot be debugged using the standard Java debuggers,
instead we need to debug them using `gdb`, the GNU Project debugger.
To demonstrate how to do this,
we are going to generate a native Quarkus application that crashes due to a Segmentation Fault when accessing http://localhost:8080/hello.
To achieve this, replace the `GreetingResource` code with the following:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import sun.misc.Unsafe;

import javax.ws.rs.GET;
import javax.ws.rs.Path;
import javax.ws.rs.Produces;
import javax.ws.rs.core.MediaType;
import java.lang.reflect.Field;

@Path("/hello")
public class GreetingResource {

	@GET
	@Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
	public String hello() {
    	Field theUnsafe = null;
    	try {
        	theUnsafe = Unsafe.class.getDeclaredField("theUnsafe");
        	theUnsafe.setAccessible(true);
        	Unsafe unsafe = (Unsafe) theUnsafe.get(null);
        	unsafe.copyMemory(0, 128, 256);
    	} catch (NoSuchFieldException | IllegalAccessException e) {
        	e.printStackTrace();
    	}
    	return "Never happens";
	}
}
----

> This code will try to copy 256 bytes from address 0x0 to 0x80 resulting in a Segmentation Fault.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code will try to copy 256 bytes from address `0x0` to `0x80` resulting in a Segmentation Fault.
```

Recompiling the Quarkus application with `-Dquarkus.native.debug.enabled` and rerunning it through `gdb` we are now able to get a backtrace making clear what caused the crash.
On top of that, add `-H:-OmitInlinedMethodDebugLineInfo` option to avoid inlined methods being omitted from the backtrace:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true \
    -Dquarkus.native.builder-image=quay.io/quarkus/ubi-quarkus-mandrel:{mandrel-flavor} \
    -Dquarkus.native.debug.enabled \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-H:-OmitInlinedMethodDebugLineInfo
...
$ gdb ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
Reading symbols from ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner...
Reading symbols from /home/zakkak/tmp/code-with-quarkus/target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner.debug...
(gdb) run
Starting program: /home/zakkak/tmp/code-with-quarkus/target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner
...
$ curl http://localhost:8080/hello
----

This will result in the following message in `gdb`:

[source,bash]
----

> Thread 4 "ecutor-thread-0" received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread 4 "executor-thread-0" received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
```

Reviewer 2: That's not a typo. Kernel thread names are of limited length and the start of Java thread names gets trimmed to fit.

Reviewer: Interesting, thanks

[source,bash]
----
(gdb) directory target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-native-image-source-jar/sources
Source directories searched: /home/zakkak/tmp/code-with-quarkus/target/sources:$cdir:$cwd
(gdb) list
164        	UnsignedWord offset = size;
165        	while (offset.aboveOrEqual(32)) {
166            	offset = offset.subtract(32);
167            	Pointer src = from.add(offset);
168            	Pointer dst = to.add(offset);
169            	long l24 = src.readLong(24);
170            	long l16 = src.readLong(16);
171            	long l8 = src.readLong(8);
172            	long l0 = src.readLong(0);
173            	dst.writeLong(24, l24);
----

We can now examine line `169` and get a first hint of what might be wrong
(in this case we see that it fails at the first read from src which contains the address `0x0000`),
or walk up the stack using `gdb`’s `up` command to see what part of our code led to this situation.
To learn more about using gdb to debug native executables see
https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/docs/reference-manual/native-image/DebugInfo.md[here].

== Frequently Asked Questions

> === Why is generating a native executable slow?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Why is the act of generating a native executable slow?
```

Reviewer 2: I think this is unnecessarily verbose. Not a native speaker though...

In any case I would prefer "Why is the process of generating..." if it is to be changed.

Author: I went with @zakkak's suggestion.

In the analysis phase, a static points-to analysis starts from the main method of the program to find out what is reachable.
As new classes are discovered, some of them will be initialized during this process depending on the configuration.
In the next step, the heap is snapshotted and checks are made to see which types need to be available at runtime.
The initialization and heap snapshotting can cause new types to be discovered, in which case the process is repeated.
The process stops when a fixed point is reached, that is when the reachable program grows no more.

The compilation step is pretty straightforward, it simply compiles all the reachable code.

The time spent in analysis and compilation phases depends on how big the application is.
The bigger the application, the longer it takes to compile it.
However, there are certain features that can have an exponential effect.
For example, when registering types and methods for reflection access,
the analysis can’t easily see what’s behind those types or methods,
so it has to do more work to complete the analysis step.

> === Why is runtime performance of natives slower compared to JVM mode?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Why is runtime performance of a native executable inferior compared to JVM mode?
```

Native executable generation is able to remove some code because of the closed world hypothesis but that is often not enough to make up for all the benefits that profiling and runtime deopt & recompile provides to the JVM JIT compiler.

Note, however, that there is a price you pay for that potentially higher JVM speed, and that price is in increased resource usage (both CPU and memory) and startup time because:

1. it takes some time before the JIT kicks in and fully optimizes the code.
2. the JIT compiler consumes resources that could be utilized by the application.
3. the JVM has to retain a lot more metadata and compiler/profiler data to support the better optimizations that it can offer.

The reason for 1) is that code needs to be run interpreted for some time and, possibly, to be compiled several times before all potential optimizations are realized to ensure
a) that it’s worth compiling that code path, i.e. it’s being executed enough times, and

> b) that we have enough profiling data to perform meaningful optimizations.

Reviewer 3: You aware that all of this will be on the same line once interpreted by Asciidoctor?

Author: Will reformat accordingly.

At that point the JVM has to jump out of the compiled code into the interpreter and recompile the code to cater for a new execution profile that includes the previously cold path.
That requires keeping runtime info that allow a compiled stack frame to be replaced with one or more interpreter frames.
It also requires runtime extensible profile counters to be allocated and updated to track what has or has not been executed.

=== Why are native executables “big”?

This can be attributed to a number of different reasons:

1. Native executables include not only the application code but also, library code, and JDK code.
As a result a more fair comparison would be to compare the native executable’s size with the size of the application,
plus the size of the libraries it uses, plus the size of the JDK.
Especially the JDK part is not negligible even in simple applications like HelloWorld.
To get a glance on what is being pulled in the image one can use `-H:+PrintUniverse` when building the native executable.
2. Some features are always included in a native executable even though they might never be actually used at run time.

> Such an example is garbage collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of such a feature is garbage collection.
```

At compile time we can’t be sure whether an application will need to run garbage collection at run time,
so garbage collection is always included in native executables increasing their size even if not necessary.
Native executable generation relies on static code analysis to identify which code paths are reachable,
and static code analysis can be imprecise leading to more code getting into the image than what’s actually needed.

> There is an https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/287[upstream issue]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is an https://github.com/oracle/graal/issues/287[GraalVM upstream issue]
```

...
  -XX:±TraceHeapChunks                         Trace heap chunks during collections, if +VerboseGC and +PrintHeapShape. Default: - (disabled).
  -XX:±VerboseGC                               Print more information about the heap before and after each collection. Default: - (disabled).
----

=== Can I get a heap dump of a native executable? e.g. if it runs out of memory

Unfortunately generating heap dumps in hprof format,
which can be opened by tools such as VisualVM or Eclipse MAT,
can only be achieved with
https://www.graalvm.org/reference-manual/native-image/NativeImageHeapdump[GraalVM Enterprise Edition].
Mandrel, which is based on the GraalVM Community Edition, does not have this capability.

Although Mandrel can generate debug symbols and these contain a fair amount of information about object layouts,
including what is a pointer field vs a primitive field, this information cannot be used as is to detect memory leaks or find dominator objects.
This is because it has no idea what constitutes a root pointer nor how to recursively trace pointers from those roots.

> === Can I create native executables for Windows?

Reviewer 2: I think this section needs to be removed. `building-native-image.adoc` already covers that part.

Quarkus applications can be converted into native executables for Windows,

> but this feature is not yet mature enough and so it has not yet been included in a RHBQ release.

Reviewer: As `RHBQ` is not mentioned anywhere, it probably makes sense to explain what it is, or at least link to https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/cloud-native-apps/why-choose-red-hat-quarkus

Reviewer 3: I think it should go away. You can say it is not recommended, that would be enough for the community website.

> A Windows section will be included in this training once it gets included.

Reviewer: Training?

> === Can I create native executables for Windows?
> 
> Quarkus applications can be converted into native executables for Windows,
> but this feature is not yet mature enough and so it has not yet been included in a RHBQ release.
> A Windows section will be included in this training once it gets included.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this section needs to be removed. building-native-image.adoc already covers that part.

[[macwindows]]

> === Can I follow these examples if I’m running MacOS or Windows?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Can I follow these examples if I’m running macOS or Windows?
```

Reviewer 3: (and yes, I'm pretty sure they will change the case one day just for fun :))

> The ideal environment for this training is Linux however, it’s still possible to follow all the steps running them within a Linux container environment in MacOS or Windows.

Reviewer: Training?

Reviewer 2: @galderz most (if not all) parts are working in macOS as well right? Maybe it's worth mentioning that as well.

Author: `gdb` debugging and profiling won't work on macOS native, but the rest yeah. I'll make a note.

> The ideal environment for this training is Linux however, it’s still possible to follow all the steps running them within a Linux container environment in MacOS or Windows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ideal environment for this training is Linux however, it’s still possible to follow all the steps running them within a Linux container environment in macOS or Windows.
```

The following `Dockerfile` shows what a Linux container requires in order to follow the examples:

[source,dockerfile]
----
FROM fedora:35

RUN dnf install -y \
binutils \
gdb \
git \
perf \
perl-open

RUN cd /opt \
&& git clone https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph

ENV FG_HOME /opt/FlameGraph

WORKDIR /data
----

Using `docker` in the non-Linux environment, you can create an image using this `Dockerfile` via:

[source,bash]
----
docker build -t fedora-tools:v1 .
----

> Then, run the docker container as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, run the Docker container as:
```

[source,bash]
----
$ docker run --privileged \
-t -i -v $(PWD)/$(project):/data --rm -p 8080:8080 fedora-tools:v1 /bin/bash
...
[root@75d1df96849c data]# _
----

[[NOTE]]
====

> Note that in order to use `perf` to profile the native binaries created in the training,

Reviewer 3: training again. You can replace it by `guide` for most occurrences probably.

the container needs to run as privileged, or with `--cap-add sys_admin`.
Please note that privileged containers are **NOT** recommended in production, so use this flag with caution!
====

Once the container is running, you need to ensure that the kernel is ready for the profiling exercises:

[source,bash]
----
[root@75d1df96849c data]# echo -1 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
[root@75d1df96849c data]# echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/kptr_restrict
----

Once you’re inside the container, you can execute `strings`, `perf`, `objdump`…, etc commands on the generated binary.
Since the binary was created inside a Linux container, the container tools should have no issues with them, e.g.

[source,bash]
----
[root@75d1df96849c data]# objdump -t ./target/code-with-quarkus-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner | grep “GreetingResource”
----

Flame graphs should also be generated inside the container:

[source,bash]
----
[root@75d1df96849c data]# perf script | /opt/FlameGraph/stackcollapse-perf.pl > out.perf-folded
[root@75d1df96849c data]# /opt/FlameGraph/flamegraph.pl out.perf-folded > flamegraph.svg
----

> The resulting svg files can then be open outside the container for visualization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resulting svg files can then be opened outside the container for visualization.
```

There are multiple ways in which a native binary produced by Mandrel can be profiled.
All the methods require you to pass in the `-H:-DeleteLocalSymbols` option.

The method shown in this reference guide generates a binary with DWARF debug information,
runs it via `perf record` and then uses `perf script` and flame graph tooling to generate the flamegraphs.
However, the `perf script` post-processing step done on this binary can appear to be slow or can show some DWARF errors.

An alternative method to generate flame graphs is to pass in `-H:+PreserveFramePointer` when generating the native binary instead of generating the DWARF debug information.
It instructs the binary to use an extra register for the frame pointer.
This enables `perf` to do stack walking to profile the runtime behaviour.
To generate the native binary using these flags, do the following:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true \
    -Dquarkus.native.builder-image=quay.io/quarkus/ubi-quarkus-mandrel:{mandrel-flavor} \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=-H:+PreserveFramePointer,-H:-DeleteLocalSymbols
----

> To get runtime profiling information out of the native binary, simply do:

Reviewer 3: General remark, we decided to use `native executable` in most of the other guides.

Furthermore, the presence of debug info enables `perf` to show us the relevant source code lines as well,
hence it does not bloat the native binary itself.
To do that, simply call `perf report` with an extra parameter to show source code lines:

[source,bash]
----
perf report --stdio -F+srcline
...
83.69%     0.00%  GreetingResource.java:20 ...
...
83.69%     0.00%  AbstractStringBuilder.java:1025 ...
...
83.69%     0.00%  ArraycopySnippets.java:95 ...
----

The performance penalty of preserving the frame pointer is due to using the extra register for stack walking,
particularly in `x86_64` compared to `aarch64` where there are less registers available.
Using this extra register reduces the number of registers that are available for other work,
which can lead to performance penalties.

=== I think I’ve found a bug in native-image, how can I debug it with the IDE?

Although it is possible to remote debug processes within containers,
it might be easier to step-by-step debug native-image by installing Mandrel locally and adding it to the path of the shell process.

Native executable generation is the result of two Java processes that are executed sequentially.

> The first process is very short and it’s main job is to set things up for the second process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first process is very short and its main job is to set things up for the second process.
```

Let’s discuss first how to debug the second process,
which is the one you most likely to want to debug.
The starting point for the second process is the `com.oracle.svm.hosted.NativeImageGeneratorRunner` class.
To debug this process, simply add `--debug-attach=*:8000` as an additional build time argument:

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--debug-attach=*:8000
----

The starting point for the first process is the `com.oracle.svm.driver.NativeImages` class.
In GraalVM CE distributions, this first process is a binary, so debugging it in the traditional way with a Java IDE is not possible.
However, Mandrel distributions (or locally built GraalVM CE instances) keep this as a normal Java process,
so you can remote debug this process by adding the `--vm.agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=*:8000` as an additional build argument, e.g.

[source,bash,subs=attributes+]
----
$ ./mvnw package -DskipTests -Pnative \
    -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--vm.agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket\\,server=y\\,suspend=y\\,address=*:8000
----

> === Can I use JFR/JMC to debug to profile native binaries?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Can I use JFR/JMC to debug or profile native binaries?
```

> JFR and JMC can be used to debug profile native binaries since GraalVM CE 21.2.

Reviewer: As JFR and JMC have not been mentioned before, best at least have a link to them.

> JFR and JMC can be used to debug profile native binaries since GraalVM CE 21.2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JFR and JMC can be used to debug profile native binaries since GraalVM CE 21.2.0.
```

However, JFR in GraalVM is currently significantly limited in capabilities compared to HotSpot.
The custom event API is fully supported, but many VM level features are unavailable.
They will be added in future releases. Current limitations are:

* Minimal VM level events
* No old object sampling
* No stacktrace tracing
* No Streaming API for JDK 17

> To use JFR, the native image must be compiled with an additional flag `-H:+AllowVMInspection`.

Reviewer 3: Not sure native image should be used here. I think we should settle on native executable, except when using image really makes sense. That's what we decided for the rest.

> To use JFR, the native image must be compiled with an additional flag `-H:+AllowVMInspection`.
> To do this when using Quarkus, add the application property: `-Dquarkus.native.enable-vm-inspection=true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use JFR add the application property: `-Dquarkus.native.enable-vm-inspection=true`.
```
